(drum music)
We continue our examination of the subjects
delivered to the public through Edgar Cayce,
from what he called, his source.
The source regularly spoke of the value
in choosing to remember our dreams
as messages from the divine part of ourselves.
The father of modern day dream therapy,
and debutee of Cayce's work, Henry Reed,
offers us a view of dreaming
I've never been exposed to in all my years of research.
He says, dreaming on behalf of others
is one of the best incentives to remember our dreams.
Henry shared his maverick journey
of bringing dream state to a new,
more useful level for humanity.
It was fun, I just sat in on
your workshop.
Thank you so much for taking the time,
I mean, you put a lot of energy out
when you're speaking.
And you have everybody laughing.
Yeah.
(laughing)
We're laughing half the time.
But there was some really profound information
that was coming out of this, and one area
I thought we might hone in on
is your work with dreams.
I mean, you were a union, initially,
union psychoanalyist, or certainly
going that direction.
Well, I made my name for myself with dreams,
but it's a mixed thing for me
because dreams wasn't really what I was doing.
I was called the father of the modern dream work
movement, because, as they say, I rescue dreams
from psychotherapy by creating this journal
that showed how many people out there
in the world were using their dreams on their own
for constructive purposes.
And when you see something in print like that,
and we had six issues of the journal,
it spread far and wide.
And psychologists and so on, they look
and say, "Gosh, I know.
"We better catch up."
When I started I was a graduate student
at UCLA in the 60s.
And dreams were looked at as like a
medical sample, something you take
to the doctor.
(laughing)
Here, you look at my dream
and you tell me what's wrong with me.
Then it would be done in extreme privacy.
Because you know there's only gonna be
shit in that poop.
(laughing)
And that was our attitude about dreams.
Really?
So you wouldn't,
think, well I mean, back in the 60s
when you go to a party and say,
"Hey, let me tell you about my dreams."
You know.
And if somebody mentioned a dream
at a party, everybody would make
a joke about it, you know?
There was really no way for people
to talk about dreams the way they
talk about the stock market,
about the weather,
about their kids.
Dreams were isolated as a topic
for professionals to deal with.
All right?
Yeah.
That was the attitude
when I was a graduate student there,
and you read about it,
that a counselor maybe helps somebody
because they interpreted somebodys dream.
Well, a friend of mine, who is our college
president when we were at Pomona College.
While I was a graduate student
James Turell, he's won one of those genius awards
now, you know?
Back then he was just one of my classmates.
He was telling me about these dreams he had.
He had this fantastic studio
on the beach in Santa Monica,
and he had no visible means of support.
I asked him, "Well James, how did you get this place?"
He said, "Well I had a dream.
"My father, who's dead, he came to me
"and he showed me this house.
"He said, "You could have a studio
"here for free.""
And he said, "I drove all over L.A.
"looking for this house, and I found it right here.
"And it was a man who wanted the house renovated
"and I'm good at carpentry, so hes giving me
"this place."
I said, "That's fantastic."
And then a couple weeks later I says,
"Jim, where have you been?
He said, "You know, I had a dream."
(laughing)
"A friend of mine was upset
"in San Fransisco.
"Went up on my motorcycle ,
"and they were in trouble.
"I was able to help them out."
I said, "James, where did you learn
"how to dream like this?
"We're not learning about dreams
'like this in school.
"To us, you know, it's a medical sample.
"You're using dreams to steer your life,
"to do these creative things.
"Where did you learn about that?"
He said, "Edgar Cayce."
A-ha.
Edgar Cayce.
I didn't know Edgar Cayce.
He explained to me a little bit about
Edgar Cayce.
And to me, he was a person who
when he was asleep, was a lot smarter
than he was when he was awake.
(laughing)
And I was studying
amnesias, multiple personalties,
trying to understand what it is
in the personality that shifts as to your memory.
How come a person can be amnesiac
for who they are, but still speak English?
You know, that's kind of weird.
And they still have their talents.
So here's a guy I thought was kind of
curious, you know, that he had these talents
when he was asleep.
But that's all, I didn't pay much more attention
to it than that.
But my friend James, he said,
"You need to keep a dream journal."
"I do?"
"Yeah."
And so he helped me actually glue together
some pages, and made a fancy thing
so I could start remembering my dreams.
So I remember it was on New Years Eve,
you know, when you make resolutions?
And I was a drunk, and I was really confused
in graduate school and stuff.
I didn't know what I was gonna do with my life.
And I said, "Maybe dreams would help me out."
So I put this journal under my pillow
on a December 31st, January 1, 1967,
is gonna be the first day of my new life.
And guess what?
I didn't remember a dream.
(laughing)
I didn't remember one until April.
April!
And I almost forgot it, but I was
just reaching into the closet
to put on a shirt, and all of a sudden
I remembered seeing this flying goat.
And I couldn't think of,
I haven't been around any flying goats.
(laughing)
And I said that
maybe that's what it's like
to remember a dream.
And I sit back down
and it starts coming to me.
This dream.
And this is a fantastic dream,
about this wise old man
who has flying goats.
And I'm getting to be on his property.
I'm gonna be learning these skills.
Of what, he's very special.
And then I see there's this haystack
with an empty bottle of wine.
And an empty bag of potato chips,
and I see that there's been some drunkard
whose been sneaking onto his property.
And boozing it up.
And I get righteously indignant.
"We got to kick out,
"we got to find this drunkard
"and kick him out."
And the old man says,
in this compassionate voice,
it just shrivels me.
"This man, he's my guest.
"And he's been here a lot longer than you
"who just arrived.
"And I put that food down there,
"those potato chips to feed him
"so that he can come in
"so that I can serve him the wine."
And I'm looking at all this, this is going
totally against my thinking,
and I'm totally ashamed and embarrassed
and I just sort of, "Well, excuse me."
And back away and go off to the forest.
What a profound dream.
Yeah!
And I wake up, and I'm thinking,
you know, I was awake already,
"This is a dream."
And I'm, "What does this mean?"
And I don't ever remember having the dream.
It's years later that I start remembering
childhood dreams.
I was totally cut off.
And I could connect, I'm Capricorn, goats.
And some people say maybe I have a
drinking problem.
I wouldn't have said so.
But now you would. (laughing)
But then he made it seem different.
Like he was feeding the guy.
So it really kind of played
with my whole feeling about drinking.
And so that was the beginning.
And it was a year later that I remembered
my second dream.
That's how hard it was.
I graduated with my doctorate from UCLA.
I'm gonna now start teaching at Princeton
University, newly minted assistant professor.
And I'm gonna teach dream recall
as my first class.
Because I realized there's nothing
in the literature.
There's a hundred studies, I had them
stacked up real high.
All these studies on factors affecting
dream recall.
From, girls remember more than boys,
artists remember more than non-artists,
blah blah blah blah blah.
But not a single article on,
what can you do to improve your
memory for dreams.
Because it wasn't really,
I talked to a (mumbling).
Well we just assume it's
dreams will naturally happen.
So no one had ever tried
to see what could happen.
So, like I said, I was a newly minted professor,
and I'm telling you this because
this is really important to this,
about what happened with me and dreams.
This is sort of a theme.
There was a psychologist in Florida
who's dead now, because he was working
on his sports car and it fell on him.
And I'm trying to think,
Sidney Jourard is his name,
and he wrote a book called,
"Disclosing Man to Himself."
And he wrote another book called,
"The Transparent Self."
And his argument was that we would have
a much more better psychology,
a much more relevant psychology,
if psychologists didn't treat people like rats.
And instead, talked to them.
What I, and dialogue with them.
And when I arrived at Princeton,
it was the hot bed for deceptive research
in social psychology
where the students would be told their
coming here to do this, or that,
but that really wasn't what was going on.
They were lab rats themselves?
Yeah, uh huh.
And I said, "Well I'm not gonna do
"anything like that."
"And instead of paying students
"to be in my experiments,
"I'm gonna charge them
"to be in my experiments.
"Because they're gonna learn something
"because I'm gonna dialogue with them
"about this."
And we started
and the university, the professors
got really mad at me,
because here I was charging people
to be in my experiments
and really criticizing deception.
You know.
Because I'm trying to enlist the students
co-operation.
Let's see what we can do with recall.
Let's see what we can do about
remembering our dreams.
Let's see what effects.
Let's see how we might measure.
Let's see how we might explore this.
And they all wanted to, you know.
And together we ended up writing a paper
that got published in The Journal of Humanistic
Psychology.
The students experiments about what they,
what kinds of things they needed to do,
they learned to improve their dream recall.
And that was really neat.
So then--
I hope at some
point you'll share with me
what some of those things are.
In this conversation.
Uhhh.
I don't want to stop your flow.
Okay.
But at some
point we'll talk about that.
Right, all right.
Practical stuff there too.
The, the uh.
Yeah, now I forget what--
Oh so
so you guys had practiced.
I'm going into, I'm going.
The, I go to The Managers Foundation
for a council growth conference
my second year of Princeton.
I'm already in hot water at Princeton
because of this experiment that I did.
I'm violating all their rules,
but I feel I'm really doing something superior,
process-wise, than what they're doing.
I go to The Managers, the council growth conference.
Which they have every year for
researchers on the cutting edge
in consciousness.
This goes back to '72.
And I meet there a man who's asking me
about what I do, and I'm talking about
the trouble that I'm getting into because
I'm doing research where I'm really trying
to take a different approach to the people.
Because we're trying to see what we can
accomplish.
You know, I kept using the idea
of getting a man on the moon.
And if you got a man on the moon
you wouldn't be worried about a control group,
you'd just try to put everything together
to maximize the chances of getting there.
Right.
You know?
And that's what
I was trying to do,
was see the mazimize the chances
that these people could come away
with the fuller dream recall
and feel that this was something for them.
And using collective
human intelligence.
Yes, exactly.
So I'm talking to this guy at Managers,
he says, "Funny, but my granddad always
"said that would be, we would make a lot
"more progress if we would do research
"like that, instead of the way we normally do it."
And I said, "Oh, who is your granddad?"
"Edgar Cayce.
(laughing)
I was talking to Edgar Charles Thomas Cayce.
His grandson.
Amazing.
And that was funny
because now I was hearing his name a lot,
because my inaugural lecturer at Princeton
a student comes up to me.
I was able to teach the first four credit
class on humanistic psychology
offered in the United States.
And my first lecture a student comes up to me
and says, "The way you're talking
"you should really go investigate Edgar Cayce."
I said, "Oh, I've heard of that name before."
Third time's a charm, yeah.
You know.
It turned out he was from Virginia Beach.
And he pointed out that Route 13
goes form Princeton to Virginia Beach
and I could go down to ARE.
(laughing)
And so when I
met Charles Thomas in Kansas
he invites me to come to Virginia Beach.
And I start designing kind of
research as a part of their middle name.
So here is a community,
different from the academic community,
where people are willing to try experiments.
I say, "Hold on all of a sudden I've got people
"so we can do research in a way that I want to."
And so the first way we did it was
the dream research project
where I wanted to show
using Edgar Cayce's idea,
that people at home, with no professional
training, can make constructive use of their
dreams on their own.
And that's very important.
And the one thing that Cayce had to offer to this,
was this, a very interesting idea.
Though if you think about it,
you'd say, Of course.
And I found an indigenous person
who followed it, so it is indigenous
to the human mind.
Which is really where Edgar Cayce is talking from.
he's talking from the depths of the human mind
and it applies to all of us.
So he said this,
"Your dreams will teach you
"how to work with them
"if you'll do the following.
"Pick something of life improvement
"that would be very constructive for you.
"That's consistent with your ideal."
So like get an exercise program
that you can stick with.
Improve your relationship with your
spouse.
Spend more time in meaningful
quiet time.
Whatever.
But something constructive.
And start by
taking any little step
that you know that you could take
that would move you in that direction.
Say, with exercise, it might be that every day
you would at least stand outside for a moment.
(laughing)
Get up out of your chair and stand outside.
A baby step.
A baby step, exactly.
Waiting then for a dream to come along,
then you will assume is commenting
on your baby step.
It's assume it.
Do whatever you want
to come up with what you think
the dream is saying.
Whatever you want.
It might just be intuitive.
It could be that
the children's camp the way we do it is
think of a color that you saw
in your dream last night,
and wear that color today.
So we make it really simple for the kids.
Okay?
That's good.
And so, maybe, you know,
the first few days you stood outside
for 10 seconds.
waiting for a dream.
If you were like me, you had to
wait three months.
(laughing)
Before a dream comes.
And maybe you have a dream eating chicken.
So what does that have to do with exercise?
I don't know, but chickens run around.
Okay.
I will go outside and I will
run around like a chicken for a minute.
Okay?
Uh huh.
And so you're doing something
that you think your dreams are
telling you to do.
You could be wrong, it doesn't matter.
This is very important.
Because people think, "Oh, I can't work
"with my dreams because how would
"I know if I was doing it right?
"How would I know if I'd have
"the right interpretation?"
And that's like asking now.
No one knows this is a
really interesting parallel.
Just like asking a scientist,
"How do you know that your theory
"is really true?"
Well, an honest scientist will say,
"We don't expect our theories to be true.
"We're constantly modifying our theories
"so we're constantly disproving our theories
"with better ones."
A good scientist would say that.
A good scientist would think that way.
Yes.
And so Edgar Cayce
actually is the only scientific approach
to dream interpretation.
Because what I was saying is,
Okay, your dream is gonna correct you.
"If you, you misunderstood what
"it was trying to say.
"It wasn't about running around.
"You know, it was more like
"take off your head, or don't be so."
Who knows?
But if you actually do what you think
it's saying, that's showing sincerity.
That's showing you're actually trying
to do something.
You're not guessing, you know, just saying,
"Well, behind which door is the lady
"and which door is the tiger?"
Hypothetically.
You're gonna walk through one of those doors
and so you're making a bet it's this one
and you're starting to walk through that door
daring your dreams to stop you if you're wrong.
And now they have incentive.
(laughing)
You know?
Yeah.
Because dreams
don't deal with hypotheticals.
Right.
Dreams are real.
They're like trying to change the tide.
You know?
Instead you've got to work with the tide.
And know when the tide is up to.
And dreams we know, pretty much
they're kind of like a thermostat.
They're trying to keep you in the
middle of the road
to take you to where you're supposed to go.
So if you start engaging like this.
So what I did then
was I created a work book
where I start out
and I have a person collect dreams
for seven days.
And we're going back to the early '70s
but this is important because of
when we get into the farther out stuff
all of this has a sound basis.
All of this has been a building block.
Block after block after block.
I wasn't aware of this until
people started pointing out to me,
"Henry, your story has continuity.
"From your dream off into these
"revelatory kinds of processes
"that you're involving people with,
"you can go back and you can see
"each little experiment,
"each little thing that led to this,
"that led to that, and so on."
It's also too, part of my secret mission
is to restore Shamanism to the Gringo American.
In a Gringo way, not imitating anybody
like I have a WalMart approach
to Shamanic soul retrieval,
that people at WalMart can do
in a WalMart way.
Rather than putting on Indian feathers
and beads, that's not our way.
You know?
In my past lives as Natives and indigenous
gets insulted and cries for the Gringos
that don't have their own way to the spirit.
Right.
Everybody deserves
their own way, there's a Gringo way.
You know?
This Gringo is neat.
(laughing)
You know?
So I'm trying to bring that.
You know, I wasn't aware of it,
at the time, but that's definitely
what I'm doing, is showing people
in their ordinary stuff, the roots
of Gringo Shamanism.
That we can do too, you know?
Yeah.
And our tea
parties, and our coffee clatches,
(mumbling), and so on.
But anyway, back to the story.
So where are we at?
Oh, so you had everybody
gather their dreams for seven days.
Yes, right.
They would gather their dreams for seven.
See, this book is still in use.
This is what now, '74,
it was first written.
And to demonstrate is something that's
never been, anybody else ever demonstrated it.
With hundreds and hundreds of people.
That people could do it,
what I'm showing you is the model.
What was the means by which
people demonstrated that they could
use their dreams on their own,
and make progress.
That led them to the journals,
that led to the dream work movement,
led to the dream helpers ceremony,
that led to the intuitive heart
and the valid enlightment training.
It's all step by step by step.
But with collaborative work,
you know, of the people.
Of the people themselves.
And you're, that's the thing
the thing that runs through all of it.
Yes.
Is you're
saying, "Don't let experts tell you who you are."
Right.
"What you
"think, what your dreams are."
Exactly.
Yeah.
I'm trying to create, what I call
the (mumbling) circle.
In other words, ways in which group
of people can get together
with no special expertise amongst themselves
and channel, as in bring together,
products, new ways of doing things,
new ways of being, solving problems,
and so on.
And one of my dreams suggesting even that
we come to a point where in consciousness
together we can start simulating photosynthesis,
which we may have to do.
We may have to be able to draw our energy
directly from the sun because the planet
and such will not be able to sit
in photosynthesis, and we need it to live.
But my dreams telling us in the right
state of consciousness, the group of people
can do that.
That's still a ways off,
and I don't want to get too.
(crosstalk)
And I have seen that
in similar states.
Show you that the solid base
that this is working with, constantly.
It's not that there's not expertise involved.
I've had a lot of education.
I've had a lot of training.
Then, you know, through the psychoanalysis
training, and the regular scientific work,
and then my own studies, and so on,
to produce this.
But it's all meant as a gift for the people.
And when we get to the dream helper ceremony
I can show you that it doesn't even take any
training to do it, it just needs
the balls to go off and do it.
Okay, so here you are.
And you've been living outside of the box
pretty much your whole life,
it sounds like.
What's that?
You've been living outside the box
almost your whole life in your thinking,
it sounds like.
And it's hard
to do that.
It is hard.
It is.
And people don't understand
what you're doing.
They interpret it in terms of the old ways.
But then you get names like
"the father of."
Because you were.
I was
really surprised by that.
(laughing)
That came out in a book later.
And it still doesn't make sense
unless I were to finish the story.
But we had for the people were these
work books to then
look in their dreams
to let their dreams decide on something
that they would go and try to improve upon.
And then they would collect dreams
for seven days.
I gave them some very simple,
we just made up exercises to help them
come up with some idea from their dream
as to what it might be saying about their subject.
And then go try it
and see what other dreams came.
Then we get back to all this mail,
all this letters of stories
of people who've changed their life,
who've overcome habits,
who develop new things, relationships,
and so on, and get them to write up articles
and magazines about them.
And some of them are dreaming that
this has to continue.
We had then a dream for America,
1976.
We had people dream for America.
It was amazing, those dreams were so
prophetic of today.
What, give me an example, or two.
I want to hear that.
Those are scary dreams.
Okay, tell me.
Scary dreams.
And they're online.
From the fascist coming into America,
where we're losing all of our freedoms
because we're scared, and we're just like sheep.
And that really, it gets some of us riled up
because, wake up folks,
don't be a sheep!
Right.
We're getting screwed here.
Right, so that was coming up
almost 40 years ago.
Yeah yeah yeah.
And also the role of UFOs
as a new consciousness
to help us, and this is this thing about
there's one dream, I'll tell you one dream.
That I think is just so, it's very sad
and scary, but, and very touching.
Because of what it suggests.
There's a crowd of people.
I look up and the sun, something's going
on with the sun.
That's always, I tell you, this is a special dream.
Out of the sun a UF, a flying saucer
is coming down.
It's coming down.
The people are looking at it,
"A flying saucer!"
And then they can look.
"We can see the captain in the flying saucer!
"It's a woman!"
(laughing)
They're all, they can't believe it,
it's a woman!
Flying the saucer!
And then just ask them,
they're more amazed that it's
a woman flying than it is a flying saucer.
(laughing)
And the thing
comes down,
and the woman comes out.
And she comes to the people
and they're all expecting,
lady what is she offering us?
And she comes and she offers us a plant.
A little plant.
And I realize that's the renewal of photosynthesis.
On the planet.
Oh goodness.
After it's not possible anymore.
The movie "Wall-E."
I've never seen that, oh yeah.
Little plant.
Oh, okay.
Ah, that's all that's left,
one little plant.
(crosstalk)
And that said a lot of things to me.
One, we really need to be
contrary to the Republicans that are
passing all these laws that say,
"We own women's vaginas
"and we're gonna tell them what to do
"with them."
In contrary to that, this is saying
the new thing, the respect for the feminine
is what's going to save us.
It's going to provide
what we're going to need.
UFO, or science, and I have a lot of dreams
about that.
That, to me,
not that there might be machines flying
around, but in terms of the evolution of
our consciousness, my dream.
Well, I'll tell you a series of dreams very quickly.
We were doing this dance, I haven't even told you
about my dream of the dance, the (mumbling) circle.
But we're doing it, and all of a sudden we
take off, and we become a flying saucer.
And this is incredible because
we get exposed to consciousness
that we're not used to.
This is huge.
It's kind of like, I can know
everybody's thoughts, I'm okay
obviously, like a salad or a symphony.
And yet as a group thing it's just
making this new, it's just way bigger.
And we land, we come back and we land,
and we realize, we never left.
No we weren't in a flying saucer.
That the flying saucers how we symbolize
to ourselves this new consciousness
that's coming.
And that was in the dream.
So anyway,
I don't know where we are in terms of
the story.
Well we can.
You've done the dreams
that all started flooding back.
You started seeing a continuity
to certain stories, like this photosynthesis
idea, the fascism, and so forth.
This is after we started the journal.
The journal, uh huh.
So we did the project with the ARE,
and I saw A, people can use their
dreams constructively.
And B, many of them are talking about
what would be in their dreams, and so on,
what would it be like if the public knew
about what we were dreaming about?
What would it be like if there was
dreams on the morning news?
I'm with you, I mean, just
talking with friends you'll
see you're dreaming in tandem.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So I said,
"Okay, I'm gonna start a journal."
And I'd already had dreams.
I had a dream where I get,
it comes to me at the Princeton
faculty mail box, a letter addressed
to Henry Reed at Sundance College.
And I went, "How did this letter addressed
"to me so wrong get here?"
You know?
And the question is,
How did the knowledge of this
architype of a (mumbling) circle
reach me in my academic studies?
Because I have now been gifted
with this, and it's true.
And so, and that's a whole other story
I don't want to get into publicly,
as the internal,
how would you say,
attaboys from the other side
that I'm okay to use some of these words
that are associated with various indigenous
people because I have carried the medicine
of that.
Okay.
And the Sundance, so we named them
The Sundance Community Dream Journal.
From your dream, yeah.
From my dream.
Yeah.
And because the purpose was the same.
Because when the Indians came up
with the Sundance, it was from
their dreams, it was like a group dream.
Vision, really.
Incubation for their survival under threat.
And also for the, how would you say,
the flowering and continuation,
and growth of their culture.
See it got into the those stance later
when they're really under a threat.
But we before that in the Plains Indians
spirituality that was a part of their renewal.
The game, where should we live,
where should we get our food
next year, where should we do our dances?
To do collective dreaming
to get their answers.
Exactly.
So I used that as the name of the journal
and started collecting from people who
are non-professionals, little articles
about what they were doing with their dreams
so other people could see.
And the weirdest thing was, we started.
I sent out a subscription notice,
like magazines do, and I said,
"You cannot decide if you're
"gonna subscribe to our magazine.
"You must put this under your pillow
"and see what dream you get.
"And what will be the impact on you
"if you subscribe to our journal."
Really, we did that!
And?
And that's what
gained the first dreams.
When people subscribed
we put all those dreams in the journal.
And the dreams were incredible.
This one gave a profound impact
on society if we had a "People" magazine
that was people's dreams.
So we got through six issues
and those places that really geared
to be successful in that way,
and we just stopped.
But I made a point.
Right.
And when I quit,
then they wanted it to continue.
So some other people came along
and they started Dream Network Journal,
or Dream Network Bulletin,
and that's still going on.
Okay.
Then The Association for the Study of Dreams
got started some time in the late '70s,
early '80s, and they credited the
Sundance Journals with being a big
impotence for that.
And a lot of the people that started
The Association for the Study of Dreams
had written in something in the Sundance Journals.
And this was showing, not only
that people can use their dreams,
but there's a major social impact
of dream sharing in some big way.
And that hasn't continued in a big way.
Now there's a place called Dream Cloud
that's put something on the web
where they're looking for dreams
and you can post your dreams.
I'd offered them to donate my
whole dream journal anonymously to them.
That they could have that on there
and other peoples.
So you could see what the whole world
is dreaming about on a given day.
That's fascinating.
You can tune in and you can see what
was the most frequently used word
in dream records last night,
of the people who were contributing, and so on.
Right.
Ah, so now and,
isn't the Arlington Institute--
No, uh uh.
doing any
of that?
No no no.
That's not what they're doing.
No no no no no no.
Okay.
So--
Arlington Institute,
he and I, we have had our interconnections.
Let me belong to one of the dream theme.
Please, yes.
Because this is, to me, this,
what I want to describe now
probably maximizes bringing the
most far out potential
with the most easy, doable means.
Okay.
Okay?
You like that.
Because of the dreams that I had
and being invited to come and work with
ARE and we had tried the thing
with the journals.
Well, that was based, the journal work,
was based on another dream that I had
using a tent.
And I put a tent up at ARE camp.
And I did a special ceremony
to get the place all sacred and everything.
And then I told the kids,
that this tent is a sacred tent now.
And you can come here and sleep,
and have a dream to heal yourself
of whatever.
But you have to be invited by a dream
to do that.
So I'm telling you first, it's there.
So now you wait.
So they would have,
some would have a dream.
and I had a process that I put them through.
And they would sleep in the tent
to have these incredible dreams.
And when that was done
I wrote the article for
The Journal of Humanistic Psychology
1970 the Princeton University faculty read it
and I was immediately fired
because I introduced prayer into the experiments.
Because I had said that
all the dream research that's being done now,
you look at the dreamer
like a chicken and an egg factory.
And you do this to them,
and you do that to them
and you see what dream pops out.
What I'm doing is I'm dialoguing
with the person.
I'm asking them, you know,
what's important to you
that you can call upon the dream land,
or whatever to help you.
Just like indigenous people would do.
And of course we're gonna have prayer,
and what's wrong with that?
You know, I'm not studying the power
of prayer, I am bringing in all the factors
that could help get the man on the moon.
Right.
You know?
This is not a study of prayer,
this is just using prayer.
And I use art work,
I have them draw pictures,
I talk with them,
I do all that I can.
As one (mumbling) said,
"Yeah, it's very suggestive."
"Okay, yeah, it is somewhat suggestive,
"but yet if they meet God in a dream
"and it changes their life,
"they're not gonna care what you say
"that if it's suggestive.
"They don't give a shit."
Right.
"Because they've changed
"and they don't care about your interpretation."
Right.
Okay.
And the context of doing that.
The editor of Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
he talks about contrasts.
He accepted that paper
without any changes,
that was published exactly as I wrote it.
In 1970, it came out in 1974.
Princeton immediately fired me about it.
But at the end of the thing
I give out a little hint about something.
While I'm at camp
the kids come up to me and they're
telling me their dreams, because
they know I'm Dream Man.
And I start noticing the dreams
they're telling me are very much related
to the dream the kid had in the tent.
Nobody's supposed to know what he was up to
because it's private.
But this camp is so supportive,
you know, everybody's for everybody,
giving back rubs and meditating together.
The kids care about him.
And so I said, "A-ha!
"We have now the naturalistic context
"for ESP in its natural setting."
Charles Thomas Cayce had in-doctored me
a lot when I first came here
about the pair of psychologists
who had come to Edgar Cayce
and said, "If you're so psychic,
"how come we can't do ESP in our labs?"
And his answer was basically,
"Because you take away all the
"reason for being psychic in the lab."
You just remove it.
In trying to be so scientific
you take away all the stuff,
and all the reasons why there would be it.
What you need to do is you create a situation
where one person really wants
to connect with another.
But they have no way of doing it,
except psychically.
And I realized that's what we had at camp.
These kids were darn curious
about that kid in the tent.
"What's he up to?
"What's going on in there?"
You know and support, so of course.
So I was talking to my friend Bob (mumbling)
a professor at the medical school of UVA.
He was in a series of famous experiments
called the (mumbling) experiments,
Dream Telepathy.
And he was often the dreamer.
He wasn't the psychologist running
the experiment, he was a subject.
Because for some reason
they found out he was a really good
psychic dreamer.
And they would have one person
stay up all night looking at a photograph.
And then the photograph
is supposed to appear in Bob's dream.
And it would.
In one of his dreams.
But he told me something they don't print.
They didn't print.
But he would have dreams about the
private life of that person too.
And that was dreaming out of bounds.
Mm-hmm.
But that showed a real dynamic.
Yeah.
I said,
"Of course, that's what these kids are doing!
"So let's set this up."
And then we used my dream
as the way to arrange it.
Where we say, "Okay,
"if someone here in the crowd
"is having a problem, needs some help,
"don't tell us what it is.
"Just step forward, ask for help.
"And we will then form a group
"of eight people, or so, around you,
"and we will promise to remember
"a dream for you tonight.
"Hopefully it will help you."
And we come back the next morning
and we go around and we share our dreams.
And this is the big thing,
this, I want to make a movie about this,
because everyone needs to know about this
because this is so powerful.
And this is so easy,
and this is almost fool proof.
And what it does is it shows
that a group of people
can make real help to another person
using their dreams, and no psychologists involved.
Nobody that has any dream knowledge whatsoever.
All they have to have is knowledge
about what happens in life!
Which we all have that.
We all carry it.
So I just call that implicit knowledge.
We all bring it.
Okay?
Here's what happens.
Well this is kind of bizarre,
I mean, people go away thinking, gosh,
you know, I want to help this person,
but the only way I can help him is to dream
for him?
I don't know if I'm gonna remember,
oh golly, what have I gotten myself in for?
I can tell that's how they feel.
I've done this for many times,
many other people who run this.
I don't have to be around,
which is what I like about it.
They come back the next morning.
We had a person, when Margaret Mead
was still alive, I don't know, she was
a famous anthropologist.
Mm-hmm, yes.
An out of the box kind of lady.
She sent a graduate student down
to where we were doing our experiments
at the ARE camp where we lived together
for awhile to try this out.
And his doctoral dissertation showed that
when you get a group of people
and you have them live together for
a period of time, they're gonna have
a certain amount of dream activity.
And we did, because morning breakfast
we would tell dreams.
That's what we did at breakfast,
everybody got to tell their dream.
And we would, we had these big sheets
you could write dreams on them
so you could gather over time.
But when we did dream helper ceremony,
two or three time we did that over
a period of six weeks,
dream recall was way up.
Right.
And we've proved that in the years since.
Like elder hostels come here.
You know, you got guys that haven't
woken up with a hard on in a long time,
no dreams whatsoever.
They get here and they find me throwing
them into a spot where they're gonna
have to dream for somebody.
And I've seen old guys coming in,
they're talking to their wives,
they're so happy, they had a dream!
(laughing)
It really works!
You know, because the secret is
you will do more, you will make
more of an effort for somebody else
than you will for yourself.
You see.
So what I've done is the basic theme
for Cayce, so I've used altruism.
I use altruism as a way of elliciting
abilities in people that they don't
know that they have.
Okay?
And then the other thing I use
is the group think where you can compare.
So the first form of altruism,
they're all recalling dreams.
So that's a big help.
They've just been shown they can
remember a dream if they really have enough
of a reason and make an effort.
That's big.
That's big right there.
Yeah, that's big.
Because most people say,
"I don't remember my dreams
"because of this and that."
And I did up an inventory,
and most people are very passive
about why they don't have dream recall.
"Oh, it's because of this,
"it's because of that."
It has nothing to do with them.
If you ask them, "Does it have
"anything to do with how hard
"you try to remember?"
"Well it doesn't have anything
"to do with that."
"Does it have anything to do
"with how much time you spend
"reading about?"
"No it doesn't have anything."
"Does it have anything to do
"with how much time you spend
"in the morning trying to remember?"
"No, it doesn't have anything."
If it's about medicine,
or they're hard to remember,
you know, that kind of thing.
This shows them
when you've got a reason
you can do it.
Yeah.
All right.
And now the other part.
"What does this dream
"have to do with anything?"
Well, why are you judging?
You don't know what the
person's question is,
you have no idea of your dream
is odd or not.
You know.
But they walk back in the morning,
they're relieved that they had a dream.
But they have no idea what
their dream was about.
And if they had dreamt anything
relevant to the person.
Well, they're in for a big surprise.
Because, you see,
there's a social term for it
called plural ignorance.
That is where everybody is ignorant
of something that's actually true for everybody.
But because no one talks about it,
no one knows!
So everybody thinks they're the only one.
Right.
And that
can be a very toxic reality in a group.
Because then they'll react like they're
the weird person, and they're acting differently.
And may be afraid to share.
Afraid to share.
I remember when I worked for awhile
at social services here in Virginia Beach.
At the time I was just a new worker
when sex abuse investigations
were just starting.
And then since I was new, I said,
"But isn't it kind of embarrassing
"to go to the door and talk to the dad
"about diddling their daughter?"
And all the other social workers went,
"Ohhh", as I spoke.
(laughing)
And it turned out
they were all uptight about it,
but no one had ever talked about it.
Yeah.
And as a result
we got some training, about how to
deal with our feelings.
Yeah.
You know?
Okay.
So this person comes in, and,
"I had a screwy dream, uhhh."
I said, "Well that's all right."
We take the person who's being dreamed for
make them turn around and put a
sack over their head, or turn around,
so we cannot get any feedback from them
to govern our brainstorming.
And as the people go around
and start telling the dreams,
what starts coming out is
they're not all that different.
They're different, but we can
start finding commonalities in them.
You know.
And I can give you some examples
if you wanted,
but the thing is
that when you're by yourself
you wouldn't be able to do that.
But in a group they start.
And they brainstorm those commonalities
and like they were on CSI or something
like that, they can use those commonalities
to profile the person.
Here's what seems to be on this persons mind.
Here seems to be what's troubling them,
and so on.
And so we talk about that until we're done.
And then we take the bag off their head
or let them turn around.
And we, all this time we haven't known.
We've been like blind men in the open,
have no idea about what we've been doing.
We said, it's funny that we had
so many commonalities, and so on.
And the person's like,
"Oh my God, you must have been
"reading my mind last night.
"Let me tell you about all the."
And they go on listing all the ways
in which we picked up on stuff.
But that's not necessarily helpful.
So I said, "Well we're not done yet.
"So now we're gonna go back.
"And we're going to everybody
"I'm gonna give you a very simple method
"to interpret your dream for you.
"Very simple.
"And so here's what I'm learning
"about me from my dream."
And so everybody goes around
and shares, "Here's what I'm learning about me
"from my dream.
"Here's what I'm learning about me from my dream."
And so by time they've gone around
in the circle saying that,
"Funny you all should say that.'
Yeah, we're all now, we're all realizing
we're all working on this same issue,
but from very different points of view,
you know.
Very different points of view.
And this person who started out being
our quote, patient, that we were gonna help
has turned out to be our teacher
because they said, well I can affect.
"Here let's take it, I'm gonna suggest
"a human issue we all work on.
"Well let's see where we're at.
"Let's see what we can learn from one another."
Because that's what it's about,
it's like a seminar on this human issue
that this person got to decide about
but none of us knew.
Right.
But the big
thing is, you know, I've written a lot about,
read a lot of studies about it.
But here's the big thing.
Is that it shows that
at the average person
to get together with a group of people
they have dreams as a resource
that they can use, no expert required.
Now I know that I've learned that
I defeat my mission
by running it myself.
Because, "Oh, it's Henry's artistry.
"It's his encouragement"
Bob (mumbling), he's run many many
many groups,
but he's always been with a group.
So I look at it like Bob's thing, you know.
Whereas I've tried to avoid running the group.
So they see that there was
no expert in the group.
And it worked.
Now I've trained, quote quote trained,
I've motivated a lot of people to try this,
where I'll say, "Okay, if you have the nerve
"I'll hold your hand.
"But when it's done you'll see
"you know you really didn't need to
"except I was a scared to do it."
That you call up some friends and say,
"Do you want to experience something
"really interesting with dreams?
"This is fantastic.
"Either come over to my house,
"or we'll meet at (mumbling) or whatever."
You get eight or nine people
and you tell them the whole deal
and say, "Let's get two or three people
"here to volunteer.
"Something going on in your life.
"And we want two or three people
"to volunteer, so we can put names in a hat.
"So we won't feel we're dreaming
"for you because you're always pushing
"at getting stuff.
"Instead, yeah you were pushy
"and you put your name in the hat,
"but so did two other people
"put their names in the hat too,
and synchronisity shows who we're dreaming for."
So every person in your circle
that you invited to (mumbling) knows that
this person does have an issue
and they didn't just push their way in
because their name was drawn from the others.
So then they go home and they dream.
They come back the next day
and I just give you a little set of instructions
that anybody can follow,
and you can work through it
and that person will be happy,
you'll be happy.
I've had people call me up,
"It works!
"We were so amazed, it worked!
"It really worked!"
(laughing)
So what--
And now
I want America to know about this
and soon and I are going to try
and raise money to get a movie on TV
so that when the people at home are watching
this, they'll look at it and they'll say,
"Gosh, that's so obvious.
"Why didn't anyone think of this before?
"Hey honey, we could do this.
"Let's call our friends, let's do this."
That's how I want them to respond.
It seems like you're talking
about people who you've gotten together
kind of naked into the situation.
Yeah.
Not knowing
what to expect, feeling self-conscious.
Yeah.
And afraid
to speak.
So what happens when you have a group
that has gotten over the self-consciousness
and now are just working together regularly?
Well.
One group got himself
elected to the senate.
Whoo, okay.
Because they helped him with strategy.
Ummm.
In groups that I've done,
I hate to describe some of these things
because it's one of those,
if you're not there, kind of thing.
Yeah.
You know?
I understand.
Ummm.
But I assume.
But I'll give you,
I'll give you one example.
Okay.
Because I got
to do this with some theatre actors
in New York City years ago,
they were pretty brave souls.
In my first writing about this,
what I ended up calling
The Sundance Experiment,
I proposed that we know
that all the spiritual literature
suggests that we're really one being.
Individualized one being.
And that theoretically,
because of supports,
reports from spiritual literature,
it's possible to have the experience
of the truth of that.
And supposedly,
according to the spiritual literature,
our evolutionary trend is headed that way.
So one day, when there's gonna be, quote,
the rapture, you might say,
is for lack of a better word,
where we'll all be wow.
Connected.
Yeah we'll be one.
Connected, yeah.
Heaven is here, okay.
I say, "If that is so,
"then it's already prewritten
"and preknown.
"And so we know it inside."
So for any gathering of people
I say, "Take 12 people.
"Whoever they are,
"there is some way
"for them to react to one another
"initiate certain actions, words, and so."
They have no idea what it might be.
But there's a certain way they could come together
and they could have that shared enlightenment
experience, clearly.
But how would we ever discover that?
What if we go to sleep together
with the intent that we will have dreams
tonight that will show us
how to interact together
the next day to have that experience?
Given that when we wake up the next day,
we won't know what those dreams
are necessarily telling us.
So how would we harvest
the knowledge in them?
So I'm trying to recruit someone
younger now because it takes a lot of energy.
Yeah.
It takes
a lot of energy.
And I found a girl in Canada
who may do this with me.
Who's studying a lot in the psycho-drama.
Who's a pro at that.
And I was just an amateur
inspired person.
So I'd hear all the,
people tell me,
what are you going to start with one?
So you'll start with one,
and have the person do a little action.
Maybe they're miming some aspect.
And this is a very intuitive.
Then have somebody else join in.
Almost as if we were going to create
some kind of a living creature
that was gonna be a composite
of these different things.
Maybe someone's doing a miming,
somebody else is saying something,
over again, then we're trying this.
We're just drawing on our dreams.
Just going around,
and then two times now,
there'd be a moment,
and just a flash of a moment.
It just happens.
It's just there.
And then it goes away
and we know how this works.
Mm-hmm.
And then you lose it.
We haven't grown enough.
One of the things, you see,
and this gets into all of my
intuitive heart training,
with the breath work,
is that in order for this heaven to come
we have to drop our shame.
We all have shame.
Yeah.
You know?
When she bit in the apple
the first thing she did was hide.
You know?
And we need that exposure.
Yeah.
And this,
I don't know if you were there
for that healing thing that I was describing.
That this comes out of the intuitive heart work
and again, it's just kind of a natural thing
without having an intent, but actually
not really knowing what you're doing
allowing this healing to occur
by somehow mischievously bringing
up one another's shame.
Or healing.
And it be where
maybe you play doctor once
in a way that made you feel ashamed.
And for some reason
I'm recalling a time when I played doctor
and had a different tone on it,
but because of the way I say it
it taps right into your feeling,
all of a sudden you see it from another perspective.
Uh huh.
And when we
see something from another perspective
there's a group that calls that a miracle.
Uh huh.
You know?
(laughing)
Yeah.
And you don't have to be in that group
to think about why that really is a miracle
to shift perspectives.
So releasing this collective
and individual shame, everyone carries
around something or another.
Something or another.
Really releases the being,
Yes.
to be able
to start speaking.
To communicate more clearly
with ourselves?
I'll describe
to you my dream of the research dance.
Okay.
When I first
came to Virginia Beach
when Charles Thomas invited me here,
and I went to sleep at his farm, I woke up
with this dream.
We were in front of the ARE building.
We had come together
to get enlightened.
But we didn't know what we were doing.
It was dark,
we were bumping into one another,
nothing was working.
And then, for some reason,
that's always a great phrase in the dream,
for some reason, we started dancing.
(laughing)
We started dancing.
And the funny thing was
we were just dancing around
you know, I think it's called all the men right,
all the men left, and you square dance,
and you work your way around
and get to see everybody?
We were doing that kind of thing.
But what we were doing is
when we were dancing everybody
had this round thing that they were showing.
It was a shield.
It was like a Mondale,
it was symbolism.
And as we would dance we would look at
the persons symbolism,
and as we saw the symbolism
we recognized who they really were.
And it was, as we were recognizing
each other, that's what was doing it.
It was the recognition,
and all of a sudden
a big fountain of sparks shot up
from our dance, like a volcano
burst in the middle of our circle.
And it was bright out,
and we could see.
And we realized this is the way.
This is the way to the enlightenment.
And since then like sparks,
in dreams sparks, that really goes to
like the primordial creative, you know,
when they talked about new stars being formed,
there's sparks kind of a thing?
And this is what led me later to
A, the idea about the photosynthesis,
because that was an energy generating
kind of a thing.
And also, the way we were communicating.
I was trying to describe today to the
people, you know, we learn in school
about the language, and make the letters right,
and drive on the right hand side of the road,
and all of that.
And so we learn how to communicate
at the conscious level.
We're constantly communicating
at an unconscious level,
but we've never been trained to observe
and actually interact there.
Right.
You see?
And so in this dream
we are interacting at that level.
We're showing one another our symbols
which are the way our souls
Right.
would think, symbolically.
And because
we're recognizing each other at that level,
that's what produces the energy.
We could have sat around and BSd
about the science of whatever forever,
and never achieved anything.
But it sounds like it was
also a moving past separation.
Oh yeah.
To truly
recognize each other as beautiful
sovereign aspects of the same.
Of the same.
Yeah.
See that's the,
where's the sovereign.
Freud said, "What do women want?
"Women want sovereignty."
Okay, well now.
This is a big issue.
And this is not just an issue for women.
This is all part of the teachings.
And I should say, not just the teaching
the discovery, because I'm saying this,
"Look, I don't have the answers.
"All I think is I've stumbled on a process
"by which we can work together
"for what we want."
You know.
That we have to be creative together.
My training is
everybody teaches training on
how you can be intuitive to get ahead in the world.
My training is how we can be intuitive together.
So we can harmonize with the world
and be smarter together.
You know, the nurses, the nurses
already know how to be intuitive.
They don't need training in intuition.
They walk past a persons room,
they see all the computers, they're saying
this persons fine.
But they sense inside somethings wrong.
They call the doctor, and you know
she comes over and she says,
"What's wrong here nurse?"
And the nurse says, "Well,
"all the signals say it's okay,
"but I've got this feeling inside
"that something's wrong."
The doctor, she says, "Well you know
"we can't go by hunches.
"We've got to go by tests
"or insurance won't pay."
You know?
So that's how we're stuck.
Okay, change, move forward a little bit.
They've had some training.
Now, nurse calls the doctor.
"What's wrong nurse?"
"Well, all the lights say everything's fine.
"But I've got this feeling nothing's not right."
The doctor says, "Okay, well give me a moment,
"let me tune in.
"See what I get.
"Mmmm.
Well, I kind of get a mmm ahhh mmm ahhh
kind of thing.
"What have you been getting nurse?"
"Well that's funny you should say that,
"because I get an on and off,
"on and off."
"Well, what's that remind you of?
"Let's think."
"Oh, could that be a sodium chloride?"
"Maybe so, let's go test that."
That's the future.
That's the future, see.
They're working together.
Yes, yes.
You see.
And like with dreams,
when someone asks me,
they did an interview with me,
20 years after I was called
the father of the modern dream
work movement,
"Have you noticed any changes."
And I say, "Well, I think there's been
"one change, but you might not
"appreciate how significant it is."
"What's that?"
And I said, "Well, let's say in 1970,
"you're at a party.
"And you say to your group,
""Last night I had a dream about a snake."
"What's the reaction?
(laughing)
"Was it rattling its tail?
"Kind of thing.
"Move ahead to 2000,
"and you're at a party,
"and you say, "I had a dream
"with a snake in it."
So I'm going to say,
"What kind of snake was it?"
That's a big change.
Big change.
That is a big big change.
And you're welcome.
For that.
That's fabulous.
Now I'm trying to go on
to the intuition part.
Because what came out of
the dream helper ceremony
was the question,
"How can people dream for one another?"
Well, because they're clearly communicating
unconsciously all the time.
So what I've done,
given the charge I got from the place here
because I invent spiritual exercises
that had psychic in them,
I've invented a number we call
intuitive heart training
that gives the waking equivalent
of what people are doing
when they're sleeping.
So that they can be intuitive together.
And we got to experiencing
some of, what we start with the heart
connection and describing those experiences.
And that's the beginning of it.
And now I've been training teachers
to go out and run these groups
and teach other people
about these things.
I say, have them do the dream helper ceremony
because that opens their eyes.
And these other things.
One ladies taking it into the schools
and homes for our kid and a parent
to have a heart connection.
Wonderful.
Which just seems like an obvious thing,
but get them to talk about it,
that's an eye opener for the parent
to listen to the kid describe something.
They're so sophisticated.
If I ask a kid, you know, we say,
"It's all inside.
"And God is as big as the whole wide world
"how can you fit God inside?"
And the kid says, "Well it's easy.
"You just love him."
Yeah, there you go.
See?
Okay,
so now, because we're almost out of time
together, how does a person plug into this
if they want to become involved?
Well, there's a lot of ways to plug in.
One way would be to email me
and say, "Do you want to plug in?
"What can you do?"
Okay.
And depends.
I offer classes.
We're having in the summer only.
I do, my main focus right now
is training people to be intuitive heart facilitators.
And then get a credential from the Edgar Cayce
Institute of Intuitive Studies.
And I work them intensively over the phone
on a one on one basis
to use the skills,
not to just do a group,
because that's what Cayce would want.
He'd have you do a group once
and that's your initiation.
But to incorporate it into your work.
So I have a teacher
who is bringing some of the things
into the classroom
and teaching the kids about heart connection
and the animal communicator
using some of the things,
not just in talking to the animals,
but in now he can teach his followers better.
Yeah.
What they were doing.
Of course there's counselors.
I have one doctor who's using
just one little aspect for relaxation training
because she likes that.
And then she uses other aspects
for her own private diagnoses of the person.
So there's a number
of different people that can plug in to.
So all they have to do
is basically email you
and you'll put them in touch
with what sounds like they
might best benefit by?
You see, intuition training
really has to be tailored.
Yeah.
I have
some general stuff,
but then it's how they respond individually
to that, you see, as they go onto the
next thing.
Well I've enjoyed this hour with you
and I wish you were a little more animated.
(laughing)
Well I wish we had
a little more time, you know,
to tell all the aspects of the story.
Oh gosh, there's so much.
I keep wondering if this is a story
that would be worth writing a book about,
but it's so discouraging, you know?
I'm not in a position where I can travel
around the country anymore.
And they say a publisher only wants to know
how many people am I going to be in front of.
They don't even care what I want to write about.
And I can't write unless I get paid for it,
I don't have the time, you know.
Maybe someone listening,
or someone here around the KC Institute
might be able to help you on that.
Well they have a famous
Well good luck on that.
channeling book but it goes nowhere.
(laughing)
Because you won't get out there
and pump it.
Other people, yeah.
There you go.
This place is not meant to
be a success.
I understand.
So they
sent me outside the box.
Yeah.
In order to
create success for them.
And on that note, let's hope
that this magnetizes exactly what you need to.
And thank you so much for sharing with us.
You're welcome.
Henry is highly active
in the dreaming community
and you can connect with him
at henryreed.com.
And that's R-E-E-D.
In addition, he has a new book out
called, "Dream Medicine",
which explains how dreams
are ready to teach us about themselves
so that we can use that information
in our every day lives.
If you're looking for more work
on dream time, you might also
enjoy my interview with Robert Moss,
author of, "Active Dreaming."
Until next time,
thanks for watching CMN.